# Balancing Selection in the Red Fire Ant: A Genome-Wide Presence with Particularly Strong Signals in Nervous System Genes
Gabriel-Luis Hernández, Richard A. Nichols, Federico López-Osorio, Rodrigo Pracana, Esteban Gomez & Yannick Wurm

# Abstract
Red fire ants are superorganisms with richly diverse phenotypes. Within each colony, there are three distinct castes — queens, males, and workers — each characterised by significant differences in morphology, physiology, behaviour, and lifespan. Moreover, the species displays two distinct social structures: single-queen colonies which have higher fitness in new habitats, and multiple-queen colonies that can outcompete single-queen colonies in dense habitats. We hypothesise that balancing selection might be driven by the demands of a single genome to encode multiple phenotypes, particularly in genomic regions under simultaneous selection for multiple optima. To investigate this, we conducted the first genome-wide assessment of balancing selection in the red fire ant. We analysed 218 Solenopsis invicta genomes from their native range to identify and describe candidate genes under balancing selection. We found 126 genes showing signals of balancing selection (0.8% of their coding genes). We described the functions of these genes and found they are mainly involved in the nervous system and protein phosphorylation. Additionally, we identified immune system and BUSCO genes that exhibit signatures of balancing selection. Further population genomics analysis highlighted four of these candidate genes with consistent signals of balancing selection. Notably, these four genes are primarily associated with neurological function. We speculate that such a distinctive pattern may be linked to the complex biology encoded in the S. invicta genome.

